k
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
GEN. JOSEPH VOTEL, Commander,
U.S. Central
Command: The air crew mistakenly
believed
that the trauma center was the
Taliban-controlled
building, which was about a
quarter-mile away.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Pentagon has
disciplined
16 U.S. military personnel after
investigating
the bombing last fall of a
hospital in Afghanistan
that left over 40 dead.
Then: revisiting the man who is
literally
walking around the world. Paul
Salopek talks
about entering a new phase in
his journey.
PAUL SALOPEK, Fellow, National
Geographic:
It's going to be more like an
expedition this
time. Rather than walking from
farm to farm,
I'm going to actually have to
camp out and
look for water and go into
survival mode on
this stretch.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Plus: With the
presidential
race all coming down to a
numbers game, we
take a look at how one state is
handling the
delegate selection process.
And Mark Shields and David
Brooks are here
to analyze the week's news.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: A U.S. attack on
a charity
hospital in Afghanistan that
left 42 people
dead was not a war crime. That
is the conclusion
of a Pentagon investigation
which determined
the October strike was
unintentional, the
result of human error and
equipment failures.
Sixteen U.S. service members
have been disciplined
as a result, but none will face
criminal charges.
We will delve deeper into the
findings right
after this news summary.
A protest and an endorsement
stole much of
the show in Republican
presidential politics
today.
John Yang begins our coverage.
JOHN YANG: A melee today, as
protesters and
police clashed outside the hotel
hosting the
California Republican Party
Convention. The
scheduled speaker? Front-runner
Donald Trump.
Because of the commotion, the
candidate had
to take the long way in.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
That wasn't the easiest entrance
I have ever
made.
(LAUGHTER)
DONALD TRUMP: My wife called.
She said, "There
are helicopters following you."
And we did.
And then we went under a fence
and through
a fence. And, oh, boy, it felt
like I was
crossing the border, actually.
(LAUGHTER)
DONALD TRUMP: It's true.
JOHN YANG: It's his second
straight day in
the state, and the second day
marred by protests;
17 people were arrested outside
his rally
last night in Orange County.
MAN: Live from the heartland!
JOHN YANG: From a hotly
contested Indiana,
the state's top Republican,
Governor Mike
Pence, told Republican listeners
who won his
coveted endorsement.
GOV. MIKE PENCE (R), Indiana:
I'm not against
anybody, but I will be voting
for Ted Cruz
in the upcoming Republican
primary. I see
Ted Cruz as a principled
conservative who's
dedicated his career to
advocating the Reagan
agenda. And I'm pleased to
support him.
JOHN YANG: The Texas senator is
banking on
a good showing in the Hoosier
State next week.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate:
We have a choice. Do we want to
get behind
a campaign that is based on
yelling and screaming
and cursing and insults, or do
we want to
unite behind a positive,
optimistic, forward-looking,
conservative campaign based on
real solutions
to the problems in this country?
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JOHN YANG: Democrat Bernie
Sanders is also
hoping for a good result in
Indiana. Today,
he had tough words for a major
employer in
Indianapolis, its now-shuttered
factory providing
the backdrop.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
Today, we are sending a very
loud and clear
message to the CEO of United
Technologies:
Stop the greed. Stop destroying
the middle
class in America. Respect your
workers. Respect
the American people.
JOHN YANG: Sanders, though, is
still the underdog
for the nomination, trailing
Hillary Clinton
by about 300 pledged delegates,
by 800 if
you count superdelegates.
Clinton ended her two-day break
from the public
eye in New York City, talking
race and education.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
Given the right circumstances,
given the appropriate
adult involvement and attention,
every child
can succeed. And we have got to
believe that,
and we have got to invest in
that.
(APPLAUSE)
JOHN YANG: In 2008, Clinton beat
then-Senator
Obama in the Indiana primary.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We will take a
closer look
at the presidential race,
including the key
role the individual delegates
will play in
selecting a nominee, later in
the program.
In Syria, fresh violence rocked
the war-torn
city of Aleppo today. Insurgents
shelled a
mosque in a government-held
neighborhood,
killing at least 15 people.
Meanwhile, new
air raids hit rebel-controlled
areas of Aleppo,
while the death toll from
Wednesday's strike
on a hospital rose to 50, all
that as the
U.S. and Russia tried to
reinforce a cease-fire
in a Damascus suburb, and in the
port city
of Latakia.
MARK TONER, State Department
Spokesman: We
want to focus on strengthening
the cessation
of hostilities, renewing it,
reaffirming it,
so that we can quell the
fighting or the violations,
the ongoing violations in these
areas. We're
fully aware of that. Aleppo is a
trouble spot.
But we're starting here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Violence in and
around Aleppo
has claimed the lives of more
than 200 people
in just the last eight days.
North Korea's Supreme Court has
sentenced
a Korean-American businessman to
10 years
of hard labor, after finding him
guilty of
spying and stealing state
secrets. Kim Dong
Chul appeared today in court in
Pyongyang.
He was handcuffed and could be
seen wiping
away tears. Kim is the second
American imprisoned
by North Korea this year.
The U.S. reported its first Zika
virus-related
death today. The Centers for
Disease Control
and Prevention said that a
70-year-old man
in Puerto Rico died from
complications from
the mosquito-borne virus. The
U.S. territory
has at least 683 confirmed Zika
cases; 65
of those are pregnant women.
Vice President Biden visited the
Vatican today,
and called for a global
commitment to the
fight against cancer. His
appearance was part
of the Vatican's conference on
regenerative
medicine. The vice president met
Pope Francis,
and in a speech urged
philanthropists, corporations,
and governments to increase
cancer research
funding.
JOSEPH BIDEN, Vice President of
the United
States: As we stand on the cusp
of unprecedented
scientific and technological
change, of amazing
discoveries that were once
unimaginable breakthroughs,
we cannot forget that real lives
and real
people are at the heart and
reason for all
that we do.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The vice
president's elder
son died of brain cancer last
year. Months
later, Mr. Biden declared a --
quote -- "moon
shot" to cure cancer, when he
announced he
wouldn't run for president.
The Eurozone has bounced back to
pre-recession
levels after an eight-year
financial crisis.
Its economy unexpectedly doubled
in the first
three months of this year.
Meanwhile, on Wall Street,
stocks fell after
the U.S. economy recorded its
slowest pace
of growth in two years. The Dow
Jones industrial
average lost 57 points to close
at 17773.
The Nasdaq fell nearly 30, and
the S&P 500
dropped 10. For the week, both
the Dow and
the S&P 500 lost more than a
percent. The
Nasdaq fell nearly 3 percent.
And a treasure trove of ancient
Roman coins
has been unearthed in Southern
Spain. Construction
workers made the discovery while
laying pipes
in a small town outside Seville.
The 1,300
pounds of bronze- and
silver-coated coins
had been stored in clay jugs.
Archaeologists
say they date back to the late
4th century,
when Romans ruled the region.
ANA NAVARRO ORTEGA, Museum
Director (through
translator): We had already seen
coins like
this, but what is incredible is
a discovery
of this dimension. There are 19
jugs full.
I can assure you that the jugs
cannot be lifted
by one person because of all the
weight and
the quantity of the coins
inside. So now what
we have to do is begin to
understand the historical
and archaeological context of
this discovery.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Researchers
believe the coins
had been stored away to pay for
soldiers or
civil servants.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
a deeper
look into the U.S. bombing of an
Afghan hospital;
selecting the delegates who will
hold the
keys to the presidential
nomination; Mark
Shields and David Brooks delve
into this week's
news; and much more.
It was an American bombing of an
Afghan hospital
that killed dozens last year.
Today, the Pentagon
released a 3,000-page-long
inquiry into the
attack and the major mistakes
that led to
it.
Hari Sreenivasan has the story.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The Pentagon
laid out the
key findings of its full
investigation today,
as well as the fallout affecting
16 service
members.
Head of U.S. Central Command,
General Joseph
Votel:
GEN. JOSEPH VOTEL, Commander,
U.S. Central
Command: The investigation
concluded that
certain personnel failed to
comply with the
rules of engagement in the law
of armed conflict.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The bombing of
the Doctors
Without Borders hospital last
October in Kunduz,
Afghanistan killed 42 people. Of
the 16 service
members who were punished, one
was a two-star
general and some were specials
ops forces.
They face administrative
actions, but Votel
maintained their actions didn't
constitute
a war crime.
GEN. JOSEPH VOTEL: The label war
crimes is
typically reserved for
intentional acts, intentionally
targeting civilians or
intentionally targeting
protected objects or locations.
The investigation found that the
incident
resulted from a combination of
unintentional
human errors, process errors and
equipment
failures, and that none of the
personnel knew
they were striking a hospital.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Even though
they didn't
know they were hitting a
hospital, the investigation
found they made multiple
fundamental and fatal
errors.
For example, the AC-130
gunship's targeting
system became misaligned after
its crew attempted
to avoid fire over Kunduz. That
resulted in
their target appearing as an
empty field,
instead of a building filled
with Taliban
fighters firing on Afghan
troops. The crew
then switched its focus to the
hospital, thinking
it was the original target,
based on descriptions
relayed from special forces on
the ground.
GEN. JOSEPH VOTEL: So the
aircraft is looking
at one location. The ground
force is thinking
they're looking at another
location. There's
no way to visually confirm that
back and forth
between them, and their
discussions, as you
look at the transcripts, don't
add clarity
to that.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Officials from
Doctors Without
Borders called it an
insufficient explanation.
In a statement, the group's
president wrote:
"Today's briefing amounts to an
admission
of an uncontrolled military
operation in a
densely populated urban area,
during which
U.S. forces failed to follow the
basic laws
of war."
The organization pressed for an
independent
investigation. They pulled out
of Kunduz entirely
after the attack in October.
For more on the military's
investigation and
the mistakes that were made, we
turn to veteran
Pentagon correspondent Jamie
McIntyre. He's
now with The Washington Examiner
and an occasional
special correspondent for the
"NewsHour."
Jamie, when we first started
reported the
story when it happened in
October, the narrative
was that U.S. forces or Afghan
forces were
under attack and that this air
cover was there
in almost a defensive capacity.
But the report
paints a different picture.
JAMIE MCINTYRE, Washington
Examiner: That's
right.
This is a really important
point, Hari, because
unlike in Iraq, where U.S.
airstrikes are
routinely helping forces on the
ground conduct
offensive operations, in
Afghanistan, that's
not supposed to be the case.
Combat officially ended in
Afghanistan at
the end of 2014, so U.S.
airstrikes are limited
to just three very specific
instances, protecting
U.S. troops on the ground, going
after remnants
of al-Qaida, and protecting
Afghan forces,
if they're in danger of being
overrun and
slaughtered.
Now, the commander on the ground
said he did
this because his forces were
under fire. But
what the report shows is that
they were nowhere
near this building. They weren't
taking fire.
In fact, he called in the
airstrike in order
to help the Afghan forces who
were going to
launch a raid on this government
building
where the Taliban was held up.
So this tragic accident, which
has a whole
series of factors involved,
never would have
happened if the commander on the
ground had
not exceeded his authority in
calling in that
airstrike which was essentially
to soften
up the target so Afghani forces
could mount
an offensive. That's not
something U.S. troops
supposedly doing.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right, so
let's talk
about the series of errors that
led to this
tragedy.
First, Doctors Without Borders
has said, listen,
we tell everyone in the battle
theater exactly
where our locations are. The
military has
this list. But it looks like
this flight took
off without that list to begin
with.
JAMIE MCINTYRE: Yes, there is no
question
this was a protected site that
was not supposed
to be hit. It was on a no-strike
list.
But, as in any accident or
mishap like this,
there is a whole series of
things that go
wrong. You interrupt that chain
at any point,
the bad thing doesn't happen.
And this one
started when the AC-130 gunship
took off in
what it thought was an emergency
mission to
go help some U.S. troops on the
ground. Turned
out they didn't have to. They
were on their
way back.
Because of that, they took off
early, didn't
have the no-strike list loaded
into their
plane. They also were then
threatened by a
shoulder-fired missile from the
ground. That
caused them to divert their
course. Their
radio antenna and satellite
radio didn't work,
so they couldn't get updatedñ
information.
As you said in your report, when
they came
back, they were at a different
angle. The
targeting system pointed them to
an empty
field. And then they made the
really fatal
mistake. And that was to try to
identify the
target visually on the ground
based on the
description that they had.
And they simply confused the
hospital building
for this government compound
that was about
a quarter-mile away. And once
they thought
that was the target, they were
convinced.
They were locked onto it. And
they began really
withering fire from the air that
lasted almost
a half-an-hour.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And this is
basedñ off a
description they're getting from
someone who's
on the ground not next to the
hospital or
next to where the fighting
allegedly was happening,
but several kilometers away.
JAMIE MCINTYRE: Yes, they were
nine kilometers
away.
And that's another -- normally,
you have to
have eyes on the target. There
is somebody
on the ground called a JTAC,
joint tactical
air controller, essentially a
spotter who
is spotting the target. They're
supposed to
have eyes on the target. What
the report found
was, nobody had eyes on the
target, not the
Afghans, not the Americans.
And, of course, course, the crew
of the plane
didn't either. And this, by the
way, is a
very fearsome weapon, this
AC-130 gunship.
It's a modified AC-130 -- C-130
aircraft with
a series of cannons out the left
side. It
circles the target and just
rains shells down
on the target. It can really do
damage to
a target. And that's what
happened here.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Jamie, even in
this report,
there still seems to be a
discrepancy in how
long this attack took place. The
government
has one number and how many
minutes the AC-130
was circling this hospital. But
the Doctors
Without Borders folks in the
beginning had
a different number.
JAMIE MCINTYRE: Yes, so they say
it was about
an hour-and-a-half.
And, by the way, they were
making desperate
calls to the U.S.ñ military
headquarters,
saying, look, we're being
attacked. Call off
that plane.
The Pentagon today admittedñ
that those calls,
as you might expect, went
through some layers
of bureaucracy before they --
the message
was passed to ground commanders.
According
to the Pentagon's investigation,
once they
determined that was happening,
the information
was relayed to the plane crew,
and they stopped
shooting.
But, again, as you mentioned,
there's a discrepancy
about that. And Doctors Without
Borders has
put out their own investigation,
their own
account of what happened based
on the eyewitness
reports of the people on the
ground. And,
really, it's really just a
horrific description
of this very, very terrible
tragedy that happened
in the very early morning hours
of the day.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Finally, let's
talk about
what's happening to these
individuals. There
were no criminal charges here.
Why? And what
happens to these people?
JAMIE MCINTYRE: Well, they
decided not to
court-martial anyone because
theyñ decided
that this was an unintentional
act, that at
every step of the way, people
were trying
to do the right thing. They just
made some
very, very terrible mistakes.
Now, ñthe people involved in
this got reprimands.
Some of them got ordered to do
training. That
in the military is a serious
thing. They refer
to that as a career-ending
letter of reprimand,
because once you get one of
these in your
file, you're not going to be
promoted. In
the military, if you're not
promoted, you
have to leave.
So, many of these people will
end up leaving
the military. And the Pentagon
has made some
changes since then. One thing
they're doing
now is, they're not sending out
any planes
out without pre-loading the
information that
has the no-strike list. You
might think they
had been doing that all along,
but they weren't.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Yes.
JAMIE MCINTYRE: And so they're
trying to make
sure that this kind of thing
doesn't happen
again.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Washington
Examiner Pentagon
correspondent Jamie McIntyre,
thanks so much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: After Donald
Trump swept the
primaries in five Northeastern
states this
week, the front-runner edged
even closer to
that magic number of delegates
we have all
heard so much about; 1,237 are
needed to secure
the GOP nomination.
His opponents are redoubling
their efforts
to keep Trump from reaching that
number, which
would make this the first
contested convention
in four decades.
If that happens, it's the
delegates, the actual
people in those seats at the
Cleveland hall,
who will play a make-or-break
role in selecting
the nominee.
John Yang takes a look at how
all this is
playing out behind the scenes in
a key state,
Virginia.
JOHN YANG: It's a Friday
afternoon in the
woods of Southern Virginia.
There's a heaping
helping of smoked shad, country
music, and
politics.
It's the 68th Annual Shad
Planking Festival,
a Virginia tradition that's part
cookout,
part political gathering. This
year, it's
a key stop for Republicans who
want to be
delegates to the national
convention in Cleveland.
WOMAN: I have been very vocal
about my support
for Ted Cruz. I believe that he
is the clear
constitutional conservative.
CLAY CHASE, Virginia Delegate
Candidate: Party
unity is critical right now. We
need to coalesce
behind Mr. Trump and win in
November.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
The Virginia one was just a
great win.
JOHN YANG: Donald Trump won the
Virginia primary
on March 1, but that was just
the first step
in selecting the state's
convention delegates
to the national convention.
Winning the primary
gave Trump 17 delegate votes,
one more than
Marco Rubio. Ted Cruz came away
with eight
delegate votes. John Kasich got
five.
Under state party rules, that's
how the Virginia
delegation will vote on the
first ballot at
the Cleveland convention. But --
and this
is key -- if nobody gets that
1,237 on the
first ballot, Virginia's
delegates, like most
of the delegates from the other
states, will
become free agents, able to vote
for whomever
they want.
From gatherings like the Shad
Planking to
the state party convention this
weekend, the
campaigns are trying to pack
Virginia's delegation
with their supporters.
STEPHEN FARNSWORTH, University
of Mary Washington:
What you are seeing in Virginia
looks a lot
like what you are seeing in a
number of other
states, where the Donald Trump
campaign may
have won the primary, but when
it comes time
to go through the integral
process of delegate
selection, it looks like Ted
Cruz is doing
a lot better.
JOHN YANG: Stephen Farnsworth is
a political
scientist at the University of
Mary Washington.
He says voting for Trump on a
second ballot
or a third, or even a fourth
would be a tough
sell for many Virginia
delegates.
STEPHEN FARNSWORTH: A lot of the
truly committed
Republicans believe that Donald
Trump is not
the best standard-bearer for the
Republican
Party. He is going to have to
try to convince
them this late in the game that
he is, and
that's going to be an uphill
battle, because
a lot of these people are
already committed
in their own minds, in their own
hearts to
other candidates.
JOHN YANG: Shak Hill is one of
those Virginia
committed Republicans. He's a
Cruz organizer
who's been recruiting supporters
to run to
be delegates at the Cleveland
Convention.
SHAK HILL, Cruz Organizer: What
we have been
doing behind the scenes is
finding like-minded
teachers and like-minded
policemen and business
owners to come to the convention
and actually
participate in the process. And
the beauty
about this is, we actually
started in November
trying to identify folks that
would end up
coming to the convention, and
this is going
to give Senator Cruz a huge
advantage.
JOHN YANG: He sees the contest
as a heavyweight
title fight.
SHAK HILL: The first round of
that boxing
match is getting the delegates,
1,237. So
if none of the Republican
candidates actually
get to that threshold, we are
going to have
a second ballot. And the second
ballot is
going to hopefully go towards
Senator Ted
Cruz.
COREY STEWART, Virginia Trump
Campaign Chairman:
We're confident at this point
that it's going
to be a first ballot victory.
We're confident
we're going to hit 1,237.
JOHN YANG: Corey Stewart is
Trump's Virginia
chairman.
The Cruz organization is trying
to get as
many people in hopes that there
will be a
second ballot.
COREY STEWART: Yes.
JOHN YANG: Are they preparing
for a war, are
they arming for a battle that
may not happen,
do you think?
COREY STEWART: I think Cruz is
counting on
a lot of people to support him
on a second
ballot who are not going to go
down in flames
with him. They're going to want
to support
the winner, and they're going to
support Trump.
JOHN YANG: And, of course,
there's another
man in the race, John Kasich.
He's behind
in the delegate count, but his
top delegate
adviser, Charlie Black, is
undeterred.
CHARLIE BLACK, Kasich Campaign
Adviser: We
believe, because a lot of those
people are
party regulars and elected
officials, they
will go to Kasich, more to
Kasich than Cruz,
because the big issue to those
delegates when
they sit down at the convention
in Cleveland
is: Who can win? Who can beat
Hillary Clinton?
And John Kasich's been
consistently ahead
of her in the polls by 10
points.
JOHN YANG: Black knows about
contested conventions:
He was a delegate hunter at the
last one in
1976. One of his aides? A
24-year-old John
Kasich.
CHARLIE BLACK: In both cases you
have to learn
who the delegates are,
communicate with them,
talk to them, make friends with
them, and
try to convince them, in this
case, for John
Kasich that he's the reform
conservative who
can win, and ask them to,
whether its the
second, third, fourth, fifth
ballot, to keep
him in mind.
JOHN YANG: But there is a floor
fight in Cleveland,
political analyst Farnsworth
warns this won't
be your grandfather's
convention.
STEPHEN FARNSWORTH: This is
completely new.
I sometimes think that this is a
process of
sort of like people today trying
to understand
how to use a telegraph. It is
really a technological
change. It's really a very
different system,
the way that these delegates are
selected
today.
JOHN YANG: And if Trump fails to
get the nomination
on the first ballot, delegates
selected at
state conventions, like this
weekend's in
Virginia, could well determine
who will become
the Republican nominee.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": the
man walking
across the world prepares to
traverse the
Silk Road; plus, a remix of the
1920's Broadway
musical "Shuffle Along." Mark
Shields, David
Brooks
Meantime, Ted Cruz grabs a key
endorsement
in the Hoosier State, Donald
Trump addresses
foreign policy, Hillary Clinton
wins four
of the five primaries this week.
That is just some of the
political news in
a week that brings us to the
analysis of Shields
and Brooks. That's syndicated
columnist Mark
Shields and New York Times
columnist David
Brooks, who is in Pittsburgh
tonight.
And welcome to you both.
So, Mark, we just saw John
Yang's report on
what they're doing in Virginia,
these delegates
who are hoping it's going to go,
at least
some of them, to a second
ballot. Where does
this Republican race stand? What
is the likelihood
of it going past the first
ballot?
MARK SHIELDS: Judy, I think the
likelihood
of it going past the first
ballot is less
than remote at this point.
Donald Trump had a victory this
week, in the
past two weeks, actually, in
which he not
only carried the five states. He
carried every
congressional district in those
five states,
and he carried every county in
those five
states, including New York.
Those states have
amounted to 213 delegate votes
John was reporting
on.
Ted Cruz, the alternative, the
establishment
alternative, collected three
delegates in
those six states. It is --
essentially, Indiana
is Alamo. I think the
Republicans have gone
from resistance to -- from maybe
rebellion
to a sense of resignation. And,
in short order,
we will see revisionism. People
will start
to -- Republicans will start to
discover virtues
in Donald Trump that they hadn't
seen before.
Victory will do that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David, where do
you see this
race?
DAVID BROOKS: Pretty much the
same way.
Maybe there were small
neighborhoods or districts
or townships where Cruz won,
but, yes, it
was a convincing win for Donald
Trump. And
if he doesn't hit the majority
number, he's
going to be close enough, so it
will be super
hard to deny.
And one of the things we have
seen in focus
groups among Republican voters,
even those
rank and file who support Cruz
or Kasich,
they don't really like the idea
that if Trump
comes so close, that their man
would be superseded
over him. And there is not much
willpower
among the Republicans, either at
the elite
or the mass level, to deny Trump
if he's close,
which it looks almost certain
like he's going
to be close.
The second thing that has
happened is not
only Trump is strong, but Cruz
looks a lot
weaker. And flailing about with
Carly Fiorina
and the alleged Kasich deal,
that looks like
the acts of a drowning man. And
so just in
terms of the moral rigor, the
motivation force,
the morale, Cruz is collapsing,
and Trump
is surging.
So, I agree with Mark.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Drowning man?
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yes, go ahead.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes, just one
thing with David's
point, and that is, Bill Cohen,
who was a
United States senator, won three
elections,
never lost an election, for city
council,
mayor of Bangor, the House of
Representatives,
had a very simple formula that
he -- he said,
I don't care how great your
ideas are, how
brilliantly you articulate them.
Before people
vote for you, they have to like
you.
And what people -- we have
learned is that
people don't like Ted Cruz. And
I think you
saw an example of it in John
Boehner, the
former speaker of the House.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Ouch.
MARK SHIELDS: Ouch -- is coming
out in just
-- at Stanford University, and
saying what
a miserable SOB. Never met a
more miserable
sob.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Lucifer in the
flesh.
MARK SHIELDS: And Lucifer in the
And I just think that there
isn't. And what
you saw was Ted Cruz got 10
percent of the
voted in Rhode Island, 12
percent in Connecticut.
Those are wipeout numbers. And
then he compounded
the problem by going into
Indiana, where basketball
is king, and talking about the
ring.
Now, you can call a basket a
hoop, but nobody
calls it a ring. It's
comparable, Judy, to
someone going to Cooperstown,
New York, to
the Baseball Hall of Fame and
saying, I love
Babe Ruth because he hit so many
touchdowns.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: And I just -- I
think it -- you
could almost feel it end at that
point.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David, you think
the ring comment
-- let me ask you about the
governor of Indiana,
Mike Pence. He came out and
today and said
he's voting for Ted Cruz. Now,
he did compliment
Donald Trump at length before he
said he's
voting for Cruz. What did you
make of that?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, that set new
levels of
lukewarmness.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: So he's sort of
for Cruz, maybe,
if you hold a gun to my head.
But, yes, it
wasn't the sort of ringing thing
that's going
to turn the momentum.
And, yes, I agree with Mark.
Cruz had a bad
week. The ring thing. The
Lucifer comment
really resonated with a lot of
people. I thought
it was a nicely understated,
generous comment.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: But, yes, it's
funny. When you
go up to Capitol Hill. And I was
up there
two weeks ago. The senators,
they still think
-- one of them told me Cruz has
more fascistic
tendencies than Trump. So, that
level of unpopularity
is undermining Cruz.
And Wisconsin, where he did so
well, turns
out to be the outlier. That was
the freakish
case where he had all the talk
radio people,
he had everybody on his side.
And that looked
like the breakout moment, but it
turns out
to have just been a parenthesis.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, if that's the
case, Mark,
does this mean that the
Republican Party is
coming around, Republican voters
are coming
around to Donald Trump?
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
And I'm surprised, as David
wrote about today,
the lack of resistance. There is
a sense almost
of -- that Donald Trump has
tapped into something,
and I, as a Republican candidate
in 2016,
sharing the ballot with him,
either running
for Congress or the Senate,
don't want to
risk alienating. I know what a
problem Donald
Trump can be. He's
controversial. He's a lightning
rod. But he has tapped into
something. And
I don't want to alienate his
voters.
That's what it seems. It's
almost like they're
bargaining, even though it's
with alarm in
many cases, certainly with
apprehension in
virtually every case.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What is going on,
in your mind,
David? And if you can talk about
it -- you're
in Pittsburgh. You said -- you
told us you're
talking to some Republican
voters there. What
are you finding out?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, a lot of
things I'm finding
out are related to why poverty
is so endemic
even among the white working
class and what
is going on with drug use.
But with Trump, I guess what I
find out is
a lot of economic resistance.
And I regard
Trump as a sui generis
candidate, as a candidate
who said a whole series of
appalling things.
And at least the people I spoke
to in the
last day, they don't see him as
sui generis.
It's like, yes, he said some bad
things, he
said some good things. To them,
he's just
a normal candidate.
And that's true for some of them
who are supporting
Cruz, by the way. And so they
don't see him
something as outside the
category of normal
politics. And the politicians,
to fight a
strong force against someone as
compelling
or aggressive as Donald Trump,
you have to
believe in your cause. You have
to believe
in what your belief system is.
You have to
believe in your standards.
And Republican self-confidence
has collapsed.
And so what's striking to me is,
they are
disgusted personally. They feel
he's going
to be disastrous for the party
in the long
term, but, for some reason,
they're incapable
thinking in long-term reasoning.
And the argument I made in my
column today
was that this is a Joe McCarthy
moment. For
20 years after, you are going to
be remembered
for where you stood at this
moment. And Republicans
should be saying I'm -- even if
it's out of
self-interest, I will not be on
the side of
that guy. I will register my
disgust with
that guy, so 20 years from now,
my grandchildren
will be able to say, he was on
the right side.
But so few are doing that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Mark, we
know a lot of
Republicans are happy with the
way Donald
Trump is going after Hillary
Clinton.
But he made a statement this
week I think
that got a lot of notice, where
he said the
only thing she has got is the
woman's card.
And he said if she were a man,
she would be
getting just 5 percent of the
vote.
Is this something Donald Trump
needs to be
careful about, or is this an
effective line
of argument for him?
MARK SHIELDS: I find it hard to
believe it's
an effective line of argument
for him, Judy.
He has got 69 to 16 unfavorable
rating among
women of both parties, so he's
got a real
problem running against Hillary
Clinton. He's
now in the Wall Street --
Washington Post/ABC
News poll, he's running 70
percent behind
her among white women.
Why do I say white women?
Because every Republican
-- Ronald Reagan carried white
women twice.
Mitt Romney carried white women
by 12 percent
over Barack Obama. John McCain
carried white
women over Barack Obama. George
W. Bush carried
white women twice.
And so this is a real problem. I
have to think
at some level, because Donald
Trump, whatever
else he is, is not an
unintelligent man, and
he's shrewd -- and he's
certainly been shrewd
to win this -- that it must be
some subliminal
message he's trying to
communicate, that she's
a woman, she's not strong, she
doesn't have
the stamina.
He's kind of talked about it.
That's all I
can think of, because I don't
think that there
is a constituency out there that
says, my
goodness -- obviously, there are
people who
don't want Hillary Clinton and
some people
don't want a woman, but I don't
see that as
a majority in the country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Hillary
Clinton, David,
has not completely locked up the
Democratic
nomination yet, but she is
clearly well on
her way.
Is he handling this the right
way? She's already
indicating -- I mean, her
campaign is indicating
this is something they are
prepared to go
to fight out with Trump all the
way through
to November.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, this is a
home run for
them.
They have printed out these
little women's
cards, things to signify they're
-- how they
are going to stand up to this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
DAVID BROOKS: And it's a total
winner for
them among suburban swing voter
women. It's
a total winner.
I think, for Trump, it's not
subliminal. It's
just unconscious. His attitudes
toward women
have been entirely consistent
for most of
his life, and this is an
outgrowth of that.
His desire to build a coalition
of resentments,
whether it's ethnic resentments
or class resentments
or any other kind of
resentments, it's his
mode.
And so resentments for men who
feel that strong
women somehow are displacing
them in society,
that's something he's going to
play to, whether
it helps him or not, because
that's his sincere
moment.
Clinton is getting ready and
sort of mobilizing,
and all this plays nicely into
her hands.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, meanwhile,
Mark, Bernie
Sanders is still there. He's
still campaigning.
He did lay off some of his
campaign workers
this week.
But he's now talking more about
what is in
the party the so-called
platform. What does
that mean? What is it that
Bernie Sanders
is going to end up, do you
think, getting
from this campaign?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, I think, if
you're not
going to win the prize, then you
-- and especially
if you're a movement candidate
-- and Bernie
Sanders is very much a movement
candidate
-- you fight for the soul of the
party, is
what you -- you lower your --
change your
target. I won't say lower it.
So, you do that by fighting.
There has to
be a fight. In other words, you
don't go this
far, this long, this many months
with this
many people engaged and
committed, and then
just meekly fold up your tents
and leave.
So, you go to the convention in
Philadelphia,
and you fight on the platform. I
mean, you
might lose. There will be a
couple of planks.
There will probably be on
economic regulation,
regulation of Wall Street,
whatever. I don't
know exactly what they are,
minimum wage.
And Clinton will accept some,
but there will
probably be a fight on others,
but you wanted
to have stood for something.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I know it's
early, David, but
what does that mean? To win
something in the
platform, what can Bernie
Sanders -- and,
again, it's early, but what does
that mean?
What can he take away from that?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, he's already
got most
of the planks in the ark
already. She's moved
significantly in his direction
on trade and
on focusing on Wall Street and a
series of
other issues.
I think the things that he would
likely focus
on are two. One is to ask her to
embrace free
college tuition, which has been
a centerpiece
of his campaign. And the
millennials are a
centerpiece of his campaign. I
don't know
if she is going to do that, but
that's something
to press for, and then something
on campaign
finance. He's revolutionized the
way campaigns
fund themselves. And so that
would be consistent.
I would see those are the two
things, and
maybe to solidify her support
for the $15
minimum wage. She's sort of
mushy on that
one. But he's had a big effect
already, and
he may just want a little -- a
few more pieces
to add to the accomplishments
and the trophies
on the wall.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, 20
seconds left.
I told you both you could say
something about
the first woman on the coin. It
was announced
last week. We ran out of time
last Friday.
Mark?
MARK SHIELDS: Yes. And you took
a cheap shot
at us last week, Judy.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: And I'm...
JUDY WOODRUFF: I'm giving you a
chance to
either come out for it or
against it.
MARK SHIELDS: Well, I -- no, I'm
for Harriet
Tubman. I'm also for Andrew
Jackson. Andrew
Jackson is getting the short end
of the stick,
but I want Harriet Tubman on the
currency.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One word, David.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: Jackson should go,
Hamilton
in, Tubman up.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, David
Brooks, Mark
Shields, thank you both.
Now an update from a man we
first met out
on a walk.
Hari recently caught up with
him.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Last fall, we
took you to
the Southern Caucasus Mountains
in the country
of Georgia to meet Paul Salopek.
He is the
two-time Pulitzer Prize-winning
foreign correspondent
on an epic journey he calls the
Out of Eden
Walk.
Beginning in the Great Rift
Valley in Africa
in 2013, Salopek is now three
years into a
decade-long walk around the
world. After our
walk with Paul, he crossed
Azerbaijan, and
then, around Christmas, hopped a
freighter
across the Caspian Sea, toward
Central Asia.
And Paul Salopek joins me again.
Paul, tell our audience where we
find you
now.
PAUL SALOPEK, Journalist,
"National Geographic"
Fellow: Today I'm in the port
city of Aktau,
Kazakstan, which is a very
remote and isolated
sort of starting line for the
next Asiatic
phase of the walk.
This is kind of where the Silk
Road butted
up against the Caspian Sea. And
you might
be able to hear a little bit of
surf in the
background. And it's a very
off-the-map place.
I mean, it's about, I don't
know, 100,000,
150,000 people, an old uranium
mining town
under the Soviet era.
And I will be walking due east
from here as
the sun rises towards China.
HARI SREENIVASAN: How long to
get to China?
PAUL SALOPEK: It's going to be
an interesting
passage, if the weather
cooperates. I have
some big mountains to go over.
Maybe as soon
as this coming winter, but more
likely springtime.
It's about 3,000 kilometers
away.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And these
3,000 kilometers
are different geographically and
topographically
than what you have already
covered, right?
PAUL SALOPEK: Yes, they are.
They're very
different.
As you recall, the last time I
reported in,
I was in the Caucasus, which is
a very, relatively
heavy populated corner of the
world, very
rugged, mountainous, also a
crossroads of
the world, lots of different
cultures, languages,
ancient migration, ancient
invasions.
What I have before me now is a
pretty arid
plain, a high plateau of dry,
brittle grasses
with very little water. So it's
going to be
more like an expedition this
time. Rather
than walking from farm to farm,
I'm going
to actually have to camp out and
look for
water and go into survival mode
on this stretch.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, how do you
ensure that
you have enough food and water?
PAUL SALOPEK: I just last
weekend purchased
a cargo horse, a Kazakh horse.
These are very
sturdy little ponies. They can
walk very far
with very little water. And I
will be leading
that animal, and it will be
carrying part
of my water and part of my food.
Also, I had to do something that
I have not
done since Saudi Arabia. Over
the last many
weeks, I have had to go out and
actually cache
water, which is a very strange,
a very surreal
experience in this gigantic
stage of open
grass and sky.
Caching water means driving out
to certain
points along the proposed
walking route and
digging a hole in the ground and
plucking
in 10 to 15 liters of bottled
water and then
covering it up and taking a GPS
coordinate.
And so going out there and
planning a few
mouthfuls of water in this
gigantic, operatic
landscape is very strange. It's
kind of like
a conceptual art piece.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The storylines
have changed
from when you left Africa and
crossed into
the Middle East, how our
dependence on our
feet shifted to our dependence
on motorized
transportation.
From a story perspective, what's
changing
about the world around you as
you now head
to this next phase?
PAUL SALOPEK: Yes, it's true.
I'm not just
heading into a new physical
environment. I'm
heading into a new sort of
chapter in human
history and in sort of a new and
different
human relationship with the
landscape.
In the Caucasus and in Anatolia
in Eastern
Turkey, I was walking through
landscapes that
were haunted often by human
conflict, by war,
by bloodshed, by massacres. So,
that landscape
was kind of spooky, to be
honest. You would
walk through villages with some
empty houses,
orchards that were no longer
tended, and these
invisible relationships between
ethnic groups
that you kind to had to suss out
as you're
walking through that fractured
landscape.
Here, it more a linear
storyline. I'm going
to be literally following in the
footsteps
of the old traders who walked
the silk roads
between China and Europe, moving
at a slow
rate along camel trails, kind of
a ghost myself,
moving through a modern
landscape that will
include gas and oil
developments, that will
include modern highways on
occasion, sporadically
coming to towns.
I will be a dusty figure leading
a horse and
then later, in Uzbekistan, a
camel, through
the modern motorized landscape
of globalization.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Is this an
opportunity for
you to think more deeply about
what it is
that you are doing, these
moments where you
are basically alone with your
guide and your
horse?
PAUL SALOPEK: You're right. It
is a much more
solitary passage.
I think, for weeks and even
months, we will
be -- my local guides and myself
will be the
only people visible in the
visible world.
And that probably will lead to
more reflective
sorts of narratives, maybe more
inward narratives,
narratives about nature,
narratives about
the nature of moving through
landscapes alone.
And so I think these long solo
passages, these
kind of adagio passages, if you
look at the
journey as music, will hopefully
allow me
to reflect on where we continue
to walk. So,
I will be jumping back and forth
between the
past and the present as I walk
across this
steppe, these grasslands,
looking at human
connections in a little bit
different way
than I was, say, a year ago,
coming through
the Caucasus.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Paul Salopek,
we wish you the best on your
journey. Thanks
so much for joining us.
PAUL SALOPEK: Always a pleasure.
Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Paul Salopek's
work and walk
are supported in part by the
National Geographic
Society and by the Pulitzer
Center on Crisis
Reporting, which often partners
with the "NewsHour."
You can find Hari's stories from
last fall
about Paul Salopek on our Web
site. That's
PBS.org/NewsHour.
Now: A
new show is opening on Broadway
that is part
homage to an old musical with a
historic role
for black performers, and one
that also included
a very complicated racial
legacy.
That show is now being
reinvented. "Shuffle
Along" debuted to generally
strong reviews
last night.
Jeffrey Brown has the story
behind a show
that was years in the making.
JEFFREY BROWN: Just one song,
"I'm Just Wild
About Harry," would last,
largely because
Harry Truman adopted it years
later.
Almost everything else about
"Shuffle Along,"
the 1921 Broadway musical
written, performed,
and directed by
African-Americans, was forgotten.
And George Wolfe, one of today's
leading theater
directors, told us that he found
that hard
to accept. We spoke at the famed
Sardi's Restaurant.
GEORGE WOLFE, Director, "Shuffle
Along": "Shuffle
Along" was the first time there
was a woman's
dancing, hoofing chorus. And I
went, why isn't
this discussed?
And then I went, so this altered
the American
musical. And then I realized it
was the first
jazz score, which then
introduced syncopation
into the American musical. We
know about "West
Side Story," but don't know
anything -- we
didn't even think to include
"Shuffle Along"
in this conversation.
JEFFREY BROWN: Wolfe has now
created a something
new titled "Shuffle Along or the
Making of
the Musical Sensation of 1921
and All That
Followed," a musical, that is,
about the musical
that Wolfe hopes continues a
conversation
begun by the original show's
creators.
GEORGE WOLFE: So, it isn't just,
how do we
present blackness on the
American stage? I
think it's more interesting. How
do we present
who we are in our myriad facets,
by being
black, by being American, by
being Southern,
by being Northern?
So, they're trying to figure out
all these
things not in a calculated way,
but in a -- in
the most natural expression of
who they are,
which is their art.
JEFFREY BROWN: The new musical
features an
all-star team of talent, led by
six-time Tony
winner Audra McDonald, who plays
Lottie Gee,
the actress who starred in the
1921 production.
It's choreographed by Savion
Glover, the renowned
tap dancer and creator of the
1990s bring
in "Bring in 'Da Noise, Bring in
'Da Funk."
He, too, took on the project
with a sense
of mission.
SAVION GLOVER, Choreographer: I
don't think
anyone has a choice to walk out
of that theater
not knowing something that they
didn't come
in with. There's so much
information in the
show, something we call
edu-tainment. It's
not just about putting on a
show. It's about
making sure that we continue to
elevate the
minds of this generation, and
then of generations
to come.
JEFFREY BROWN: Four men created
the original
1921 play, composer Eubie Blake
and lyricist
Noble Sissle, writer-actors
Flournoy Miller
and Aubrey Lyles, and brought
new sounds and
moves to Broadway.
The play introduced onstage
romance between
blacks, rarely, if ever, seen in
the era.
It also included older elements
of Vaudeville
and black actors in blackface.
Tony award winners Billy Porter
and Brian
Stokes Mitchell play the comedy
team of Miller
and Lyles.
BRIAN STOKES MITCHELL, Actor:
One of the parts
of the show is that our two
characters performed
in blackface, as did many
performers back
then.
And it's interesting, because it
had a different
context for African-American
performers, because
it was more like a -- in a
sense, a mime mask
is. But then those characters
and that style
was usurped by white culture,
who then didn't
really understand, appreciate,
honor that
tradition that it came from, and
it became
a caricature then of black
behavior at the
time, and became offensive.
BILLY PORTER, ACTOR: You know,
to be truthfully
honest with you, just from
reading the song
titles on the album cover, me
and my black
friends, in our naivete, sort of
rejected
this show in the way...
JEFFREY BROWN: Because?
BILLY PORTER: Because, you know,
they had
songs like "Pickaninny Shoes"
and "Bandanna
Land." And we heard that there
was blackface.
And, you know, without context,
without historical
context to sort of look at it
through that
lens, we immediately rejected
it. And I think
this has been such an amazing
journey for
me to understand.
JEFFREY BROWN: The original 1921
"Shuffle
Along" was a Broadway sensation,
bringing
white audiences to a story of
and performed
by blacks, playing more than 500
performances,
unheard of at the time.
The likes of Josephine Baker and
Paul Robeson
appeared in it, before going on
to international
stardom. Leading white artists
of the day,
including George Gershwin and
Florenz Ziegfeld,
came repeatedly and borrowed or
lifted riffs
and moves, another part of
America's cultural
history.
It was a great success, but a
painful aftermath,
as the four creators of the
musical squabbled
among themselves and never again
worked together.
GEORGE WOLFE: I think it's what
makes the
material exciting and why you go
on the journey.
And I think the large idea that
"Shuffle Along"
is about is, will I be
remembered? I came
into this world with X-amount of
equipment
and X-amount of desires and
dreams and frailties,
and I tried to do the best I
can.
JEFFREY BROWN: As opening night
approached,
though, Savion Glover, having
created the
moves the actors will dance to,
had something
more immediate on his mind.
SAVION GLOVER: I'm going to
sneak in there
one day to tie somebody up. It
might be Billy
Porter.
JEFFREY BROWN: But we're not
going to know
when.
SAVION GLOVER: You're not going
to know when.
JEFFREY BROWN: Now, that would
delight theater
and dance fans.
From the Music Box Theatre on
Broadway, I'm
Jeffrey Brown for the "PBS
NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now for our
"NewsHour"
Shares, something that caught
our eye that
we thought might be of interest
to you too.
The American bison is poised to
become the
first national mammal of the
United States,
thanks to a bipartisan act of
Congress. The
Senate passed the National Bison
Legacy Act
by unanimous consent last
evening, following
the House's approval Tuesday.
The act will designate bison,
also known as
buffalo, as a national emblem in
honor of
their historical and
contemporary significance.
Tens of millions of bison once
roamed the
nation's Great Plains and other
regions. But
hunting, ranching and western
expansion decimated
the population, and bison
numbers dwindled
to less than 1,000 by the start
of the 20th
century.
They have since rebounded
though, with nearly
a half-a-million bison currently
living in
wild and commercial populations.
More than
50 conservation, ranching and
tribal groups
supported the new designation,
even though
the act won't impose any new
protections on
the animals. The bill now heads
to the White
House for President Obama's
signature.
On the "NewsHour" online:
Yesterday, our columnist
Wendy Thomas Russell explained
why she stopped
giving time-outs to her
5-year-old. Today,
she shares 12 alternative
methods of discipline
that may help parents.
And a Virginia history teacher
challenged
his students to use the past to
talk about
present-day racism by taking
them to the birthplace
of the student civil rights
movement. Read
about a recent field trip that
inspired his
class to open up a conversation
about race
and inequality.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And a reminder about some
upcoming programs
from our PBS colleagues.
On "Washington Week": why
Hillary Clinton
took a break from the campaign
trail, and
a closer look at how Donald
Trump may be shifting
his strategy to become a more
mainstream candidate.
That's later tonight on
"Washington Week."
On "PBS NewsHour Weekend"
Saturday: tracing
the history of art looted by the
Nazis.
ERIC LEE, Director, Kimbell Art
Museum: Before
we buy a work of art, we do as
much research
as we can.
NARRATOR: After a flurry of
looted art claims,
15 years ago, American museums
adopted guidelines
telling them how to handle
Nazi-looted art.
The Kimbell decided to review
everything and
be transparent.
ERIC LEE: It's a sculpture of
extremely high
quality.
NARRATOR: In 2011, Lee was shown
this photograph
of the sculpture in the hands of
a special
allied army unit dedicated to
post-war art
recovery, the Monuments Men, who
found it
stashed with Nazi loot in an
Austrian salt
mine.
ERIC LEE: I was completely
floored by this.
We had no idea that the
sculpture had been
taken by the Nazis.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That's coming up
on "PBS NewsHour"
Saturday.
And we will be back right here
on Monday,
when I will talk to Howard
Buffett, businessman,
philanthropist and the son of
billionaire
investor Warren Buffett.
That's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Have a great weekend. Thank you,
and good
night.